JSP Model 2 is a complex design pattern used in the design of Java Web applications which separates the display of content from the logic used to obtain and manipulate the content.
Since Model 2 drives a separation between logic and display, it is usually associated with the model–view–controller (MVC) paradigm.
While the exact form of the MVC "Model" was never specified by the Model 2 design, a number of publications recommend a formalized layer to contain MVC Model code.
The Java BluePrints, for example, originally recommended using EJBs to encapsulate the MVC Model.

In a Model 2 application, requests from the client browser are passed to the controller.
The controller performs any logic necessary to obtain the correct content for display.
It then places the content in the request (commonly in the form of a JavaBean or POJO) and decides which view it will pass the request to.
The view then renders the content passed by the controller.

Model 2 is recommended for medium- and large-sized applications.

Misconceptions
A common misconception is that a formalized MVC pattern is required to achieve a Model 2 implementation.
However, the Java BluePrints specifically warn against this interpretation:

The literature on Web-tier technology in the J2EE platform frequently uses the terms "Model 1" and "Model 2" without explanation.
This terminology stems from early drafts of the JSP specification, which described two basic usage patterns for JSP pages.
While the terms have disappeared from the specification document, they remain in common use.
Model 1 and Model 2 simply refer to the absence or presence (respectively) of a controller servlet that dispatches requests from the client tier and selects views.

Furthermore, the term "MVC2" has led many to a mistaken belief that Model 2 represents a next-generation MVC pattern.
In fact, MVC2 is simply a shortening of the term "MVC Model 2".
The confusion over the term "MVC2" has led to additional confusion over Model 1 code, resulting in common usage of the nonexistent term "MVC1".

Details: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSP_model_2_architecture